# EXER_02a_dalioba/Exercises


\n
New line as a separator vs new line as the end of a line
For persons who interpret new line as a separator, if there is a new line at the end of the file, the file actually has an empty line at the end of it.

\n as a separator 
Example:
```
1\n
2\n
3\n
4
```
or as 
```
"1\n2\n3\n4
```
There are 4 lines in the file. There are 7 characters.

\n as a terminator
Example:  
```
1\n
2\n
3\n
4\n
```
or as 
```
1\n2\n3\n4\n
```
There are 4 lines in the file. There are 8 characters.

The program recognizes auto as a keyword, but it thinks that everything else is an ID.  
Augment the lexer.  
One keyword has been done for you in the lexer.l 

How complex is flex?
flex is not a lexical analyzer
flex makes a lexical anaylzer
you cannot use flex to make tokens.
The lexical analyzers will make tokens.

How hard was it to write flex?
Not very. Dalio wrote his own flex called LexerGen

# M02 Syntactic Analysis  
## Syntactic Analysis
What do we use for syntactic analysis?
Regular expressions

What form are we going to use to express a regular expression?
CFG

What do we have in a CFG?
The start symbol

What is the breakdown from the start symbol? That is our goal in syntactic analysis.

Why are misspelled keywords a syntactic error? Because it almost always looks like an ID. 
If you were in a state where int was an acceptable token, that its almost certain that ant will not be. 
So misspelled keywords are normally syntactic errors because they end up mistaken as IDs when they shouldve been a keyword.

Why are undeclared identifiers not a syntactic errors?
If you see an ID and it's supposed to be a variable, the only way to know it's undeclared is if you have context.
Since we have no context, it is a Context Free Grammar, we don't know what to do with it. 
Those errors will have to be picked up by Semantic Analysis.
Semantic Analysis keeps a symbol table.

Can we use regular expressions as the notation for the formal specific of program structure?

## Why Not Regular Expressions?  
The finite automaton does not have any memory beyond the state it happens to be in, so the amount of memory a finite automaton has is how many states it has. 
All we have to do is make an input that is one more level deep and the finite automaton would become lost.  

## Context-Free Grammar  
Don't confuse automata with grammar. Grammars don't have states. They have terminals and nonterminals. They do not have accepting states.
Automata and grammars are entirely different abstractions, though they are **related** 

## CFG example
Definitely beyond regular expressions.  

