BIOL 1441/Lesson 5.md, before:

# Lesson 5 Notes
## Slide Notes
![WhatsYourSource](Flash%20Cards/assets/lesson5.1.png)
**Autotrophs** (“self feeders”) are organisms that CAN build their own energy-rich macromolecules
**Photoautotrophs** (like plants) use the energy of light to do this ^
**Chemoautotrophs** (like some bacteria) use the energy of inorganic molecules (like sulfur or ammonia)

Because humans CANNOT make these molecules themselves, we are considered **heterotrophs** (“other feeders”) Animals, fungi, and most bacteria are also
heterotrophs.



## Homework Answers
One "goal" of the **light reactions** of photosynthesis is to generate ATP.
The light reactions of photosynthesis occur **In the thylakoid membrane (of a chloroplast)**

**Rubisco** is the enzyme that performs carbon fixation.

**ATP Synthase** is the enzyme that uses the proton gradient to build ATP.

**Photosystems (I and II)** is the name of the complexes where light is used to energize electrons.

**Six** carbon dioxide (CO2) are needed to generate **one** new glucose molecule (C6H12O6)

Cellular respiration & Photosynthesis are connected to each other in that cellular respiration generates carbon dioxide, which is used in photosynthesis.

*Oxygen* is made during the process of photosynthes when **Photosystem II** breaks down H2O to generate it.

The special electrons for **Photosystem I (PSI**) come from **Photosystem II (PSII)**

**G3P (Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate)** is organic compound is the direct output of the Calvin cycle

A reactant (a.k.a. starting material) of the Calvin Cycle is **ATP**

Plants are an example of an organism that would be considered **an autotroph**

Commit message:

Update Lesson 5.md
Added learning objectives

BIOL 1441/Lesson 5.md, after:

# Lesson 5 Notes

## Learning Objectives
1. Explain how autotrophs & heterotrophs obtain their energy.
2. Write the overall chemical equation for photosynthesis.
3. Identify which reaction words (anabolic / catabolic, endergonic / exergonic) accurately
describe photosynthesis.
4. Identify the source of energy for photosynthesis.
5. Name the locations of the light reactions & the Calvin Cycle in a plant cell.
6. Describe the general functions of the light reactions & the Calvin Cycle in photosynthesis.
7. Explain how the wavelength of light relates to its color & energy level.
8. Explain why plants are green.
9. Name the structures that are found in a photosystem.
10.Explain how photosystems trap light energy.
11.Identify the source of the excited electrons found in Photosystem II & Photosystem I.
12.Explain how the light reactions of photosynthesis generate oxygen.
13.Describe how the proton (H +) gradient across the thylakoid membrane is generated.
14.Explain how the H+ gradient is used to generate ATP.
15.List the products & reactants of the light reactions.
16.Explain the relationship between the products of photosynthesis’ light reactions & the
reactants of the Calvin cycle.
17.Explain what happens in carbon fixation.
18.Name the enzyme that performs carbon fixation.
19.Explain why 6 turns of the cycle is necessary to make 1 glucose.
20.Explain how photosynthesis & cellular respiration are related to one another.

## Slide Notes
![WhatsYourSource](Flash%20Cards/assets/lesson5.1.png)
**Autotrophs** (“self feeders”) are organisms that CAN build their own energy-rich macromolecules
**Photoautotrophs** (like plants) use the energy of light to do this ^
**Chemoautotrophs** (like some bacteria) use the energy of inorganic molecules (like sulfur or ammonia)

Because humans CANNOT make these molecules themselves, we are considered **heterotrophs** (“other feeders”) Animals, fungi, and most bacteria are also
heterotrophs.



## Homework Answers
One "goal" of the **light reactions** of photosynthesis is to generate ATP.
The light reactions of photosynthesis occur **In the thylakoid membrane (of a chloroplast)**

**Rubisco** is the enzyme that performs carbon fixation.

**ATP Synthase** is the enzyme that uses the proton gradient to build ATP.

**Photosystems (I and II)** is the name of the complexes where light is used to energize electrons.

**Six** carbon dioxide (CO2) are needed to generate **one** new glucose molecule (C6H12O6)

Cellular respiration & Photosynthesis are connected to each other in that cellular respiration generates carbon dioxide, which is used in photosynthesis.

*Oxygen* is made during the process of photosynthes when **Photosystem II** breaks down H2O to generate it.

The special electrons for **Photosystem I (PSI**) come from **Photosystem II (PSII)**

**G3P (Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate)** is organic compound is the direct output of the Calvin cycle

A reactant (a.k.a. starting material) of the Calvin Cycle is **ATP**

Plants are an example of an organism that would be considered **an autotroph**
