
## What is AI
**Acting like Humans**  
Turing Test (Imitation Game) - Alan Turing (1950)
- Suggested major components of AI
1. Knowledge
reasoning
language understanding
learning
- Still relevant today but not really useful

*Have we "achieved AI"?*
Not really. 
When we aks assistants like Siri a question, it first has to perform voice recognization. Then natural langauge processing, like the ums and ahs from your query. Then it must send to a server to choose from a large number of responses. Then it has to put together a response that is most appropriate for your query.
It is not an AI, it simply learning over the time the best response to your question.


**Thinking like Humans**  
To build such a system we need to know how the brain works
- What level of abstraction?
- How to validate the system
Predicting and testing human behavior (Cognitive Science)
Identify from neurological data (Cognitive Neuroscience)  
- These are approaches now considered distinct from AI

**Thinking rationally**  
What is rational?
- Is all human thought rational?  
*Behavior taken for the expert purpose of achieving payoff. Much of that is subjective* 

Rational thought has been studied since time of Aristotle
- "Socrates is a man; all men are mortal; Therefore, Socrates is mortal".

We can build systems that can, in principle, solve problems given in such a logical notation

*In practice, you can end up with a solution that is computationally impractical. A way of saying, theoretically this will work, but it will require so many resources and take such a long time, that it is not worth it. This applies to RSA encryption.*

**Acting Rationally**
*The definition that the book uses, and that we will use*  
Rational Behavior: Doing the 'right' thing
How to define right?
- whichever maximizes Goal Payoff  

Doesn't necessarily involve thinking (reflex)  
- Anything should be in service of rational action

Aristotle (Nichomachean Ethics):
- Every art and every inquiry and similarly every action and pursuit, is thought to aim at some good  

This is the approach the textbook (and therefore the course) will be studying  

# Rational Agent  
An agent is an entity that perceives and acts 

This course is about designing rational agents  

Abstractly, an agent is a function from percept histories to action:  
f: P* -> A  

For any given class of environments and tasks, we seek the agent (or class of agents) with the best performance  

Caveat: computational limitations make perfect rationality unachievable so design best program for given machine resources  

*When we say function we mean in the mathematical sense. For any particular percept history, this will match to an action*

*Because of computational limitations, perfect rationalities might not be achievable. So our goal is to build an agent, for any given percept history, try to map to the action that maximizes the payoff*

# History of AI
*Not so important*  

# State of AI  
*We are not going to be looking at all of these*  
*We would be looking at very shallow and vary broad ways in building rational agents*  
*We will look at specific families of approaches that work for certain types of problems*  
*Then we'll look at specific types of problems and approaches that are more efficient in solving those problems*  
*If time permits, we will take a quick peek at neural networks*  

*we will start with rational agents next class*