
* Binders last 3 years, after that he trashes them

# ALL PROJECTS NEED TO BE COMPLETE BY APRIL 30TH

* but we still should try to finish it by the 23rd

THANK GOD

## Distributed Systems

* Virtually all large computer-based systems are now distributed systems.
* Information processing is distributted over several computers rather confined to a single machine.
* Distributed SWE is therefore very important for enterprise computing systems
  * Enterprise is when a business is about more than one thing
  * usually multiple businesses
* one of the largest problems with this is security.

## System Types: SUPER IMPORTANT

* Personal Systems that are not distrubted and that are designed to run on a personal computer or workstation.
* Embedded Systems: that run on a single processor or on an integrated grou of processors.
* Distributed Systems: Where the system software runs on a loosely integrated gorup of cooperating processors linked by a network.

## Distributed System Characteristics

* Resource Sharing
  * Sharing of hardware and software resources
* Openness
  * Use of equipment and software from different vendors.
* Concurrency
  * Conccurent processing to enhance performance.
* Scalability
  * Increased throughput by adding new resources.
* Fault tolerance
  * The ability to coninue in operation after a fualt has occured.

## Distributed system disadvantages

* Compelexity
  * Typically, distributed systems are more complex than centralised systems.
* Security
  * More susceptible to external attack.
* Manageability
  * More effort required for system management.
* Unpredictability
  * Unpredictable response depending on the system organization and network load

## Distributed systems architectures

2 Types

* Client-server Architectures
  * Distributed services which are called on by clients. Servers that provide services are treated differently from clients that use services.
* Distributed object architectures
  * No distinction between clients and servers. Any object on the system may provide and use services from other objects

## MiddleWare (IMPORTANT)

* Software that manges and supports the different components of distributed systems .
* Middleware is usually off the shelf rather than specfically written software.
e.g.
  * Transcations, processing monitors;
  * data converters;
  * Communication controllers.

## Big vs Little Endien

Intel, microsoft... :

* Use little endien

Apple, Amazon etc... :

* Use Big endien

Little endien:

* Pushes small to big
* DATA: 456
  * Little endien: 654
  * Box

Big Endien:

* Pusshes big to small
* DATA: 456
  * Big Endien 456
  * Triangle

Thats where middleware comes in:

* Can convert little to big, Big to little
* box to triangle, triangle to box

CORBA is another middleware Converter

## CLient Server Architecture

* The application is modelled as a set of services that are provided by servers and a set of clients that use these services
* Clients know of servers but servers need not know of clients
* client and servers are logical processes
* The mapping of processors to processess is not necessarily 1 : 1

Servers are Squares, clients are circles

looks a lot like a bunch of nodes and clusters

## Layered application architecture

* Presentation Layer
  * Concerned with presenting the results of a computation to system users and collecting user inputs.
* Application processing layer
  * Concerned with providing application specific functionality e.g. in a banking system, banking functions such as a open accounts, close acc. etc.
* Data management layer
  * concerned with managing the system database

## Thin and Fat Clients 2 models

Thin client model:

* all of application processing and data mangement is carried out on the Server

Fat client model:

* Server is only responsable for data management, the software on the client implements the application logic

Who uses fat client:

* Microsoft (how many copys of word do you have)
* Intel
* Dell

Who uses Thin client:

* Google
* Amazon
* Nvidia

Everybody is moving to thin client, because thin is better
